Early life history temperature exposure of *Pocillopora acuta* larvae to acute and developmental pre-exposure in Mo'orea, French Polynesia in December 2021.   

**Abstract**  

Ocean warming is increasing in frequency and intensity and heat waves can occur simultaneously to gametogenesis and coral spawning or planulation. In light of this, it is critical to understand the effects of such short term thermal stress on the sensitive early life stages of reef building corals, which are critical for the replenishment of the reef and the genetic diversity of subsequent generations. We characterized acute energetic and molecular responses to ambient (27°C) and two increased temperatures (31°C and 34°C) in brooded *Pocillopora acuta* larvae in Mo’orea, French Polynesia through measurement of 1) energy production (photosynthesis) and expenditure (respiratory demand) and 2) gene expression (RNAseq/TagSeq) following 5-hour exposures to these thermal regimes. Larvae exposed to elevated temperatures exhibited reduced photosynthesis and impaired energetics (reduction in photosynthesis:respiration ratio). Following the examination of acute response at the larval stage, we also assessed the effects of exposure to thermal stress during the final stages of brooding by exposing parental colonies to elevated temperature (+2°C) for 87 h prior to larval release (Dec 4th 18:00 - Dec 8th 09:00). We then assessed larval metabolic rates at 12 temperatures ranging from 20 - 40°C using a thermal performance curve (TPC) approach. We found that larvae pre-exposed to high temperature during the last few days of brooding within the parents had lower TPC (Topt and Perfomance max), indicating reduced thermal performance even from an acute exposure to increased temperature during brooding (87 hours at +2 °C). Our results demonstrate that the intersection of heat waves during the final stages of larval brooding, or within the first several hours of larval life can have detrimental effects on larval energetics, which may reduce capacity to survive and recruit under future ocean warming conditions. ~ 